---
layout: post
date: 2021-08-18 01:05:40 +0000
title: An Interesting Combinatorial Sum
summary:
tags: maths combinatorics algebra tripos
index:
  best_of: true
---

The following problem appeared as part of [this years Part IA exams](https://www.maths.cam.ac.uk/undergrad/pastpapers/files/2021/paperia_4_2021.pdf).

> **Problem**. Show that
>
> $$
> \sum_{r=0}^{n}(-1)^{r}\binom{n}{r}^2 = \begin{cases}
>            0 &\mbox{if $n$ is odd}, \\
>             (-1)^{n/2} \binom{n}{n/2} &\mbox{if $n$ is even}.
>            \end{cases}
> $$

The normal solution involves looking at the coefficient of $x^n$ in the equation

$$
(1-x)^n(1+x)^n=(1-x^2)^n,
$$

but it is possible to solve the problem without resorting to the binomial theorem.

## A Combinatorial Solution

*Solution*. 
We begin by noting that

$$
\binom{n}{r}^2 = \binom{n}{r}\binom{n}{n - r}
$$

is the number of ways of choosing $r$ elements from $\\{1, \dots, n\\}$ followed by $n - r$ elements from $\\{n + 1, \dots, 2n\\}$. Then as we sum over $r$, the sum (ignoring the minus sign) counts the total number of $n$ element subsets from $\\{1, \dots, 2n\\}$.

Now to each $n$-element subset of $\\{1, \dots, 2n\\}$, we assign '1' if the subset contains an even number of elements in $\\{1, \dots, n\\}$, and a '-1' if it contains an odd number. Summing over all of these assigned numbers then is equivalent to our original sum.

Consider the following mapping. Given a subset of size $n$, let $1 \leq x \leq n$ be the smallest integer for which exactly one of $x, n + x$ is in the set. We then toggle $x$ and $n + x$ in the subset, giving us another subset of $\\{1, \dots, 2n\\}$ of size $n$, but maps between elements of different sign. It's also clearly an involution (applying it twice gives you back the original subset).

If $n$ is odd, then this mapping is well defined, since if there was no such element $x$, then $x$ and $n + x$ would always be in the subset, and there would have to then be an even number of elements in the subset (which isn't the case).
If $n$ is even, then this mapping is only not well defined when we always have both $x$ and $n + x$ in the subset. Thus the mapping is not defined on $\binom{n}{n/2}$ subsets, since we can fully specify each of these by choosing the $n/2$ elements of $\\{1, \dots, n\\}$ to include. Also all such subsets were given the sign $(-1)^{n/2}$.

Thus if $n$ is odd, we can use this mapping to pair each element with a positive sign to an element with a negative sign, and the total sum is zero. If $n$ is even, then we can do this for all but $\binom{n}{n/2}$ elements, all of which have sign $(-1)^{n/2}$, and thus summing up we get the desired answer, 

$$
\sum_{r=0}^{n}(-1)^{r}\binom{n}{r}^2 = \begin{cases}
          0 &\mbox{if $n$ is odd}, \\
           (-1)^{n/2} \binom{n}{n/2} &\mbox{if $n$ is even}.
          \end{cases}
$$